>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, AUGUST 9:
RESCUE EFFORTS CONTINUE IN
NORTHERN IRAQ AFTER TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF CIVILIANS FLEEING
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS END UP
STRANDED.
PRESIDENT OBAMA ACKNOWLEDGES
THAT AMERICAN INTELLIGENCE
UNDERESTIMATED THE THREAT POSED
BY THE JIHADISTS.
AND IN THIS COUNTRY, A
POTENTIALLY IMPORTANT COURT
RULING ABOUT WHETHER PROSECUTORS
CAN USE VIOLENT RAP LYRICS
AGAINST THE DEFENDANTS WHO WROTE
THEM.
>> WHEN THEY STARTED DOING THE
LYRICS, PEOPLE STARTED FROWNING
THEIR FACES.
BUT IT HAD NOTHING TO DO WITH
THE CASE AT ALL.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BEFORE LEAVING FOR VACATION ON
MARTHA’S VINEYARD TODAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA WARNED THAT HE
COULD NOT PUT A TIMETABLE ON THE
LATEST AMERICAN MILITARY
INTERVENTION IN NORTHERN IRAQ.
ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS THERE HAVE
CLOSED TO WITHIN ABOUT 25 MILES
OF THE KURDISH CAPITAL OF ERBIL,
WHERE MANY AMERICANS ARE SAID TO
BE.
THE MILITANTS’ ADVANCE HAS ALSO
PROMPTED TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
OTHERS TO FLEE THE CITY AND TAKE
REFUGE ON A MOUNTAIN, WHERE THEY
ARE NOW TRAPPED.
>> AND AMERICAN AIRCRAFT ARE
POSITIONED TO STRIKE ISIL
TERRORISTS AROUND THE MOUNTAIN,
TO HELP FORCES IN IRAQ BREAK THE
SIEGE AND RESCUE THOSE WHO ARE
TRAPPED THERE.
NOW, EVEN AS WE DEAL WITH THESE
IMMEDIATE SITUATIONS, WE WILL
CONTINUE TO PURSUE A BROADER
STRATEGY IN IRAQ.
WE WILL PROTECT OUR AMERICAN
CITIZENS IN IRAQ, WHETHER
THEY’RE DIPLOMATS, CIVILIANS OR
MILITARY.
IF THESE TERRORISTS THREATEN OUR
FACILITIES OR OUR PERSONNEL, WE
WILL TAKE ACTION TO PROTECT OUR
PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND IN
IRAQ, WE ARE JOINED ONCE AGAIN
TONIGHT BY NOUR MALAS OF THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL."
SHE JOINS US VIA SKYPE FROM
ERBIL.
SO, IN THE PAST WEEK, WE SAW
THIS MASSIVE ASSAULT BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE, THEY TOOK OVER
THREE TOWNS AND THEN JUST IN THE
LAST 24 TO 48 HOURS THEY TOOK
OVER ANOTHER, WHAT IS THE LATEST
WE KNOW ABOUT HOW THEY ARE
ADVANCING?
>> THEY HAVE MOVED EVEN CLOSER
OVER THE PAST FEW DAYS TO ERBIL,
THE CAPITAL OF THE IRAQI
KURDISTAN AND THAT IS REALLY
WHAT SENT OFFICIALS HERE,
RESIDENTS OF THE KURDISH REGION
INTO A PANIC, AND PROMPTED
ULTIMATELY THE U.S.
INTERVENTION, THERE IS A LARGE
AMERICAN CONSULATE PRESENCE
HERE, THERE ARE THOUSANDS OF
U.S. CITIZENS AND ON THE IRAQI
SIDE THERE ARE THOUSANDS OF
YAZIDIS ON THE MOUNTAIN SIDE
THAT THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT HASN’T
BEEN ABLE TO HELP THEM SO THIS
HAS BEEN, CAUSED U.S.
INVOLVEMENT INTO IRAQ.
>> YOU GOT THERE RIGHT BEFORE
THE U.S. AIR STRIKES HAPPENED,
WHAT WAS THE AFTERMATH? WHAT
WERE THE CONSEQUENCES.
>> WHEN I GOT HERE, PEOPLE WERE
IN A PANIC, THE ISLAMIC STATE
ENCROACHMENT ON THE CAPITAL, IT
IS NOT CLEAR THESE ARE ACTUALLY
THE GOALS OF THESE MILITANTS,
THEY ARE DEFINITELY MAKING A
PUSH ALL THE WAY ACROSS THE
IRAQI KURDISH BORDER WHICH IS
620 MILES, THEY ARE TRYING TO
CONSOLIDATE THE AREAS AND THE
TOWNS THAT THEY HAVE TAKEN,
MOVING UP TO THE BORDER, BUT
JUST GETTING CLOSE ENOUGH TO
ERBIL HAS SENT SO MANY PEOPLE
INTO A PANIC ALREADY, U.S. AIR
STRIKES, THAT STARTED ON
THURSDAY APPEAR TO HAVE CALMED
THINGS DOWN, PEOPLE FEEL MORE
COMFORTABLE THAT THERE IS
PRECISION AND TARGETED STRIKES
THAT TRY TO PUSH BACK SOME OF
THESE INSURGENT POSITIONS,
THOUGH IT IS NOT CLEAR YET
EXACTLY WHAT EFFECT THEY HAVE
HAD.
>> WHAT IS LIFE LIKE IN THE
CAPITAL?
WHAT ARE YOU SEEING
TODAY?
>> THE CAPITAL IS RELATIVELY
NORMAL AND CALM, IT IS TENSE,
BECAUSE, THE KURDISH FORCES HAVE
SPREAD OUT, GOING IN AND OUT OF
ERBIL, THERE IS A HEAVY SECURITY
PRESENCE, THERE IS A BIT OF
SUSPICION WITH THE NON-CURDS, SO
KURDISH OFFICIALS ARE TENSE
ABOUT THE THOUSANDS OF SUNNI
NON-KURDISH IRAQIS FLOODING
INTO THEIR TERRITORY FROM
ELSEWHERE, SOME PEOPLE FEAR
THAT, YOU KNOW, THIS COULD BE I
INFILTRATED BY THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
>> LET’S GET TO WHAT IS
HAPPENING ON THE MOUNTAIN, WHAT
IS THE LATEST ON THE
HUMANITARIAN AIR DROPS?
>> THERE WAS A SMALL
BREAKTHROUGH WITH AN EVACUATION
ACTUALLY, THE UNITED STATES
CONDUCTED TWO AIRDROPS, EARLY
THIS MORNING AND THEY HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO REACH SOMETHING LIKE
10,000 OR MAYBE A LITTLE BIT
MORE THAN THAT PEOPLE, THERE ARE
ABOUT 40,000 YAZIDI STRANDING ON
THE MOUNTAIN SIDE SORRY MANY ARE
IN NEED, THE U.N. IS TALKING
ABOUT TRYING TO HELP FURTHER
HUMANITARIAN AID ITSELF BUT ALL
IT SPEAKS TO HOW TRULY STRANDED
THEY ARE AND HOW TERRIBLE THEIR
CONDITIONS ARE.
I WAS ABLE TO MEET WITH A DOZEN
FAMILIES UP NORTH IN THE
PROVINCE, AND ALL OF THEM REALLY
RECOUNTED THE SAME TERRIBLE
FLEEING IN THE MIDDLE OF THE
NIGHT, GRABBING WHATEVER THEY
COULD, IN MOST CASE JUST THEIR
KIDS, A LOT OF THEM DIDN’T HAVE
CLOTHES OR THE ROADS WERE TOO
JAMMED WITH CARS AND THEY HAD TO
JUST WALK FOR HOURS, SOMETIMES
DAYS TO GET TO SAFETY, AND EVEN
HERE IN IRAQI KURDISTAN THEY ARE
JUST CONSUMED WITH NEWS FROM
HUNDREDS OF THEIR RELATIVES
STRANDED ON THE MOUNTAIN SIDE.
>> AND WHAT IS TRAVEL LIKE
INSIDE IRAQ NOW? THE LAST TIME
WE SPOKE WITH YOU IN A DIFFERENT
CITY DID YOU TO TAKE EXTRA
PRECAUTIONS?
>> ACTUALLY, I TOOK A FLIGHT
OVER HERE RIGHT IN TIME BEFORE A
BUNCH OF INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES
CANCELED FLIGHTS TO ERBIL, SOME
OF THEM SINCE THEN HAVE
REINSTATED THEM, IT IS A GAUGE
WHAT AIRSPACE EXPURT IS GOING TO
BE LIKE AND ALSO JUST TO SEE HOW
CLEAR HOW LONG IT TAKES THE U.S.
AIR STRIKE OPERATIONS ARE GOING
TO BE.
>> THE HIGHWAYS
CONNECTING MAJOR CITIES STILL
ARE ANYTHING LEADING, YOU KNOW,
TO MOSUL OR OFFSHOOT, YOU BOUND
TO RUN INTO OR RUN THE RISK OF
RUNNING INTO AN INSURGENT
PRESENCE, SO THERE IS A FEAR
THAT THE ROAD TRAVEL OPTION IS
NOT GOING TO BE SAFE FOR MUCH
LONGER.
>> NOUR MALAS OF THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL," JOINING US LIVE
VIA SKYPE, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS YET
ANOTHER ROUND OF VIOLENCE TODAY
BETWEEN ISRAEL AND HAMAS
FOLLOWING THE COLLAPSE YESTERDAY
OF THE LATEST HUMANITARIAN CEASE
FIRE.
THE ISRAELI MILITARY SAID IT
LAUNCHED MORE THAN 30 AERIAL
ATTACKS TODAY, DESTROYING AT
LEAST THREE MOSQUES AND A HAMAS
SECURITY COMPLEX.
AT LEAST FIVE PALESTINIANS WERE
KILLED.
ACCORDING TO ISRAELI OFFICIALS,
PALESTINIAN MILITANTS HAVE FIRED
MORE THAN 65 ROCKETS INTO ISRAEL
SINCE THE END OF THE CEASE FIRE.
NO INJURIES WERE REPORTED TODAY.
IN UKRAINE TODAY, A PRO-RUSSIAN
REBEL LEADER SAID HE WOULD
ACCEPT A CEASE FIRE TO HELP
PREVENT A HUMANITARIAN DISASTER
THERE.
THIS AFTER UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT
TROOPS REPORTEDLY SURROUNDED THE
CITY OF DONETSK, WHERE THE
REBELS HAVE RETREATED.
SHELLING HAS DAMAGED MANY
BUILDINGS IN THAT CITY OF NEARLY
A MILLION PEOPLE.
MOST STORES ARE CLOSED AND
THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS ARE
MAKING DO WITHOUT ELECTRICITY.
FROM WEST AFRICA TONIGHT, WORD
THAT SEVERAL MAJOR CORPORATIONS
INCLUDING CATERPILLAR, CANADIAN
OVERSEAS PETROLEUM AND TAWANA
RESOURCES OF AUSTRALIA ARE
STARTING TO SCALE BACK THEIR
OPERATIONS IN COUNTRIES AFFECTED
BY THE OUTBREAK OF EBOLA.
CATERPILLAR SAID IT HAS
EVACUATED FEWER THAN TEN PEOPLE
SO FAR BUT IS STILL CLOSELY
MONITORING THE SITUATION.
NEARLY 1,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED,
PRIMARILY IN SIERRA LEONE,
GUINEA AND LIBERIA.
IN THE EASTERN AFRICAN NATION OF
UGANDA TODAY, A GAY PRIDE
PARADE.
THE EVENT OCCURRED JUST DAYS
AFTER A COURT RULED THAT THE
NATION’S STRINGENT ANTI-GAY LAW
WAS UNCONSTITUTIONAL.
THE LAW HAD SPARKED
INTERNATIONAL CONDEMNATION AND
PROMPTED CUTS IN INTERNATIONAL
AID TO THAT NATION.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, A DISTRICT
COURT JUDGE IN CALIFORNIA HAS
THROWN OUT A SETTLEMENT REACHED
LAST SPRING BETWEEN TECHNOLOGY
COMPANIES GOOGLE, APPLE, INTEL,
ADOBE AND MORE THAN 60,000 OF
THEIR EMPLOYEES.
JUDGE LUCY KOH SAID THE $324
MILLION DEAL WAS INSUFFICIENT.
THE COMPANIES ALLEGEDLY COLLUDED
NOT TO HIRE EACH OTHERS’
EMPLOYEES, A DEAL THAT THE
EMPLOYEES CLAIM ARTIFICIALLY
SUPPRESSED THEIR SALARIES.
IN HER RULING, THE JUDGE WROTE
THAT THERE IS SUBSTANTIAL AND
COMPELLING EVIDENCE THAT STEVE
JOBS WAS A, IF NOT THE, CENTRAL
FIGURE IN THE ALLEGED
CONSPIRACY.
THERE’S BEEN A FATAL OUTBREAK OF
TUBERCULOSIS AT HOMELESS
SHELTERS IN ATLANTA.
NEARLY 50 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
INFECTED, INCLUDING TWO
VOLUNTEERS, AND THREE PEOPLE
HAVE DIED.
HEALTH OFFICIALS SAY TRANSIENTS
ARE ESPECIALLY VULNERABLE TO THE
DISEASE.
THERE WERE JUST UNDER 10,000
CASES OF TUBERCULOSIS REPORTED
IN THE UNITED STATES LAST YEAR.
THE DISEASE SPREADS THROUGH THE
AIR FROM CLOSE PROXIMITY TO AN
INFECTED PERSON.
AND VOLKSWAGEN ANNOUNCED TODAY
THAT IT IS RECALLING NEARLY
200,000 OF ITS TIGUAN SMALL
SPORT UTILITY VEHICLES.
THE COMPANY SAYS THEY MIGHT
UNEXPECTEDLY STALL, LEADING TO
ACCIDENTS.
THE VEHICLES AFFECTED ARE THE
MODEL YEARS 2009 THROUGH 2014.
>> Sreenivasan: RETURNING NOW TO
THE DAY’S TOP STORY, AMERICAN
EFFORTS TO SLOW ADVANCES BY
ISLAMIC STATE JIHADISTS IN
NORTHERN IRAQ AND TO RESCUE
THOUSANDS OF CIVILIANS WHO HAVE
FLED FROM THEM.
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED NOW FROM
WASHINGTON BY DOUGLAS OLLIVANT.
HE IS A SENIOR NATIONAL SECURITY
FELLOW AT THE NEW AMERICA
FOUNDATION AND A PARTNER AT
MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
SO, THIS MORNING, WE HEARD THE
PRESIDENT SAY THAT THIS IS ABOUT
TWO THINGS, PROTECTION OF
AMERICANS, AND ABOUT
HUMANITARIAN AID, THIS WASN’T SO
MUCH ABOUT DISLODGING ISLAMIC
STATE GROUP FROM THE POWER THAT
THEY ARE ALREADY WIELDING IN
LARGE PORTIONS OF IRAQ.
>> I THINK THAT IS EXACTLY
RIGHT.
THE PRESIDENT WANTS TO USE AIR
FORCE, AIR POWER AND NOT U.S.
BOOT ON THE GROUND IN ANY
ENGAGEMENT WITH THE ISLAMIC
STATE, WHAT HE HAS DONE IS SET A
CONDITION WHERE HE CAN FULFILL
THIS PROMISE, AIR POWER IS VERY,
VERY GOOD AT DEALING WITH
ATTACKING TROOPS, YOU KNOW, YOU
ARE MOVING, YOU SHOOTING, YOU
ARE CREATING A SIGNATURE THAT
CAN BE SEEN FROM THE AIR, AND IT
IS PRETTY EASY FOR AIR POWER TO
ENGAGE TARTS LIKE THAT, THAT IS
THEIR ELEMENT, THAT’S WHAT THEY
DO BEST.
WHEN YOU START TALKING ABOUT
PUSHING THEM OUT OF CITIES WHERE
THEY ARE DUG IN OR HIDDEN IN
BUILDINGS, THEIR POWER HAS SOME
REAL, AIR POWER HAS REAM REAL
LIMITATIONS AND THAT WILL TAKE
BOOTS ON THE GROUND AT I DON’T
THINK THE PRESIDENT WILL GO
THERE.
>> SO MUCH OF THIS IS DEPENDENT
ON IRAQ FORMING A GOVERNMENT.
>> THE BEST CARE SCENARIO IRAQ
FORMS A GOVERNMENT, ARE THEY
STRONG ENOUGH TO COMBAT THIS ON
THEIR OWN?
>> IT REALLY DEPEND ON THE TYPE
OF GOVERNMENT THAT COMES
TOGETHER AND WHETHER THEY CAN
REALLY GET ALL THREE SIDES.
ALL THREE SIDES HAVE SOMETHING
TO GIVE HERE.
THE CURDS HAVE SOME VERY, VERY
DEDICATED FIGHTERS IN THE NORTH,
THEY HAVE A SECURE BASE THERE IN
THE MOUNTAIN THAT THEY CAN
REALLY PUSH OUT OF, AND WE HAVE
ASSETS WORKING OUT OF THE
AMERICAN CONSULATE THERE, THE
SOUTH HAS THE BULK OF THE
AMERICAN EQUIPMENT THAT REMAINS,
THE ARTILLERY PIECES, THE TANKS,
THE ARMORED PERSONNEL CARRIERS
AND A LARGE MANPOWER PULL FROM
THE SOUTH THEY COULD USE TO PUSH
NORTH AND THEN OF COURSE THE
SUNNI GROUPS ARE IN THE MIDST OF
THIS AND THEY COULD REALLY
BECOME A FIFTH COLUMN FOR ICE
SISTER, ISIS INTERNALLY SO YOU
CAN GET ALL THREE OF THESE
GROUPS WORKING TOGETHER THAT
WOULD BE THE KEY BUT THE IRAQIS
NEED TO MOVE QUICKLY TO TAKE THE
NEXT STEPS TO FORM THEIR
GOVERNMENT.
>> TODAY THE PRESIDENT SAID THIS
COULD BE SOMETHING THAT
CERTAINLY IS NOT SOLVED IN BOOK
WEEKS, IT COULD BE A LONG-TERM
SITUATION.
>> WHAT KIND OF TIMELINE IS
LIKELY AND IN THE MEANTIME IS
THE ISLAMIC STRENGTH GROUP
STRENGTHEN THEIR HOLD ON THE
PLACES THEY ALREADY HAVE?
>> THAT MAY BE THE CASE. THE
IRAQI PRESIDENT WHO HAS BEEN
ELECTED THERE IS A NEW
PRESIDENT, SHOULD BE APPOINTING
A, OR DESIGNATING SOMEONE TO
FORM A GOVERNMENT HERE IN THE
NEAR FUTURE.
THEY ARE STILL YANG LING OVER
THAT BUT TAKING EVERY DAY OF THE
15 DAY OF THE CONSTITUTION
ALLOTS, DEPENDING ON HOW YOU
COUNT HOLIDAYS OR SUNDAY HE IS
JUST OVER OR JUST UNDER THAT
DEADLINE, HOPEFULLY WE WILL SEE
SOME ANNOUNCEMENT IN THE NEXT
DAY OR TWO.
>> IN THE HUMANITARIAN FRONT,
HOW COMPLICATED IS IT TO CREATE
THAT CORRIDOR OF SAFETY IF WE
ARE PROTECTING IT IN FROM THE
SKIES? HOW DO WE GET THE PEOPLE
OFF THE MOUNTAIN AND INTO A SAFE
AREA?
>> I THINK IT IS GOING TO BE A
STRETCH TO CALL IT A SAFE EXOR
DOOR, IT MAY BE A SAFER
CORRIDOR, WHEN PROTECTED FROM
THE AIR.
THAT AIR POWER CAN ONLY DO SO
MUCH, AND TO SAY THAT THEY WILL
HAVE TOTAL SAFETY MOVING FROM
THE MOUNTAIN INTO, EVIDENTLY THE
KURDISH AREA OF SYRIA IS NOT
SOMETHING I THINK WE CAN
GUARANTEE, SAFER BUT NOT SAFE.
>> AND ON THE HUMANITARIAN FRONT
WE HAVE HAD SOME PARTNERS FROM
EUROPE SAY THEY ARE WILLING TO
HELP, ON THE MILITARY FRONT, IS
THAT UNLIKELY OR THE SAME?
>> I THINK VERY UNLIKELY,
CERTAINLY ON THE HUMANITARIAN
FRONT WE WILL GET ASSISTANCE,
BUT I DON’T SEE ANYONE WILLING
TO STEP UP AND HELP WITH THE
JUSTIFICATION THAT WE HAVE RIGHT
NOW.
OUR JUSTIFICATION FOR THE AIR
STRIKES IS PROTECTING AMERICAN
FORCES IN BAGHDAD AND IRBIL,
OTHER GOVERNMENTS MAY NOT HAVE
THAT EXCUSE.
>> DOUG OLLIVANT, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, THE NEW
JERSEY STATE SUPREME COURT
WEIGHED IN ON A CONTROVERSIAL
NEW TECHNIQUE IN THE FIGHT
AGAINST CRIME: THE GROWING USE
OF RAP LYRICS AS EVIDENCE IN
CRIMINAL CASES.
PROSECUTORS SAY THOSE LYRICS CAN
HELP PROVE A SUSPECT’S MOTIVE OR
EVEN CONTAIN A CONFESSION;
CRITICS ARGUE RAP LYRICS ARE
LARGELY FICTION, AND PLAYING
GRAPHIC LYRICS IN COURT
PREJUDICES JURIES.
THE NEWSHOUR’S WILLIAM BRANGHAM
HAS THE LATEST ON A TOPIC HE
FIRST REPORTED ABOUT IN JUNE.
>> Reporter: BACK IN 2005,
OUTSIDE THIS NEW JERSEY HOUSE, A
SMALL-TIME DRUG DEALER WAS SHOT
MULTIPLE TIMES AND LEFT NEAR
DEATH BY THE CURB.
WHILE HIS STORY CHANGED A FEW
TIMES, HE’D LATER TELL POLICE
THAT THE MAN WHO SHOT HIM WAS
THIS MAN: ASPIRING RAPPER AND
FELLOW DRUG DEALER VONTE
SKINNER.
THOUGH SKINNER SAYS HE’S
INNOCENT-- HE ADMITS HE WAS
THERE THAT NIGHT BUT SAYS HE
DIDN’T PULL THE TRIGGER AND
DOESN’T KNOW WHO DID-- HE WAS
ARRESTED AND CHARGED WITH
ATTEMPTED MURDER.
AT HIS TRIAL, PROSECUTORS HAD 13
PAGES OF SKINNER’S EXTREMELY
GRAPHIC, VIOLENT RAP LYRICS READ
ALOUD TO THE JURY.
THEY WERE FROM NOTEBOOKS FOUND
IN THE BACK OF A CAR SKINNER WAS
DRIVING.
HERE’S JUST A TASTE OF WHAT THE
JURY HEARD:
IT WENT ON LIKE THAT FOR MORE
THAN 15 MINUTES.
THE LYRICS DON’T MENTION
ANYTHING ABOUT THE SPECIFIC
SHOOTING OR THE ACTUAL VICTIM--
THEY WERE, IN FACT, WRITTEN
MONTHS AND YEARS BEFORE THE
CRIME OCCURRED-- BUT PROSECUTORS
INTRODUCED THEM AND A JUDGE
ALLOWED THEM IN ORDER TO
DEMONSTRATE SKINNER’S ALLEGED
MOTIVE AND INTENT TO COMMIT
VIOLENT ACTS.
AMAR DEAN IS A PHILADELPHIA-
BASED RAP PRODUCER AND VONTE
SKINNER’S BROTHER.
HE SAYS HE WAS IN THE COURTROOM
WHEN THE LYRICS WERE READ TO THE
JURY, AND, JUST BY WATCHING
THEIR REACTION TO THOSE LYRICS,
HE KNEW HIS BROTHER WAS GOING TO
BE CONVICTED.
>> WHEN THEY STARTED DOING THE
LYRICS, PEOPLE STARTED FROWNING
THEIR FACES.
YOU KNOW, BODY LANGUAGE SPEAKS
VOLUMES.
A LOT OF THEIR FACES WERE IN
SHOCK-- "WHOA, DID HE SAY THAT?
DID HE DO THAT?"-- BUT IT HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH THE CASE AT
ALL.
>> Reporter: SKINNER WAS FOUND
GUILTY OF ATTEMPTED MURDER AND
SENTENCED TO 30 YEARS IN PRISON.
THIS TREND OF INTRODUCING RAP
LYRICS AS EVIDENCE IN CRIMINAL
PROCEEDINGS IS SPREADING
NATIONWIDE.
THERE ARE SOME CASES, LIKE
DENNIS GREENE’S CASE, WHERE THE
CONNECTION BETWEEN A RAP AND A
CRIME IS CLEAR.
IN 2003, GREENE BRUTALLY KILLED
HIS WIFE AND THEN RAPPED
SPECIFICALLY ABOUT COMMITTING
THE MURDER.
THE LYRICS WERE INTRODUCED AT
TRIAL, AND HE WAS SENTENCED TO
LIFE IN PRISON
BUT OTHER CASES AREN’T AS CLEAR
CUT.
>> THREE SPECIFIC WORDS ARE WHAT
PROSECUTORS HOPE WILL LINK
TORRENCE HATCH...
>> Reporter: TWO YEARS AGO IN
LOUISIANA, A RAPPER NAMED
TERRANCE HATCH-- KNOWN AS LIL
BOOSIE-- WAS TRIED FOR FIRST
DEGREE MURDER.
PROSECUTORS ARGUED THAT A FEW
CRYPTIC WORDS OF ONE RAP SONG
WERE IN FACT A CONFESSION.
HATCH WAS FOUND NOT GUILTY.
TO CRITICS LIKE ERIK NIELSON OF
THE UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND,
PROSECUTORS SHOULD RARELY, IF
EVER, USE RAP AS EVIDENCE IN
COURT.
NIELSON SAYS RAP IS AN ART FORM
THAT INTENTIONALLY USES
ELABORATE WORDPLAY AND
EXAGGERATION AND BOASTING.
AND YES, WHILE RAP MAY SOMETIMES
CONTAIN GRAPHIC VIOLENCE,
NIELSON ARGUES THAT’S A
REFLECTION OF THE COMMUNITIES
WHERE MANY YOUNG BLACK MEN LIVE.
HE SAYS RAPPERS ARE CREATING
CHARACTERS, NOT WRITING DIARIES.
>> THAT IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
DISTINCTION THAT CONSTANTLY GETS
MISSED IS THAT THERE IS AN
AUTHOR AND A NARRATOR.
WE SEEM TO BE ABLE TO GRASP THAT
CONCEPT WITH EVERY OTHER ART
FORM THAT USES THE FIRST PERSON
NARRATIVE, BUT RAPPERS WHO GO
THE EXTRA MILE TO SIGNAL THAT
THEY ARE INVENTING A NARRATOR
WITH THEIR USE OF A STAGE NAME,
WE STILL REVERT BACK TO THIS
IDEA THAT THEY’RE THE SAME.
WE CONFLATE THE TWO.
>> Reporter: DAVID LABAHN, A
FORMER GANG PROSECUTOR AND
C.E.O. OF THE ASSOCIATION OF
PROSECUTING ATTORNEYS, BELIEVES
RAP LYRICS CAN BE A VERY
APPROPRIATE TOOL FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT BECAUSE HE SAYS
THEY’RE NOT ALWAYS "MADE-UP"
STORIES.
>> I WOULD SAY YOU CAN’T HAVE IT
BOTH WAYS.
YOU CANNOT SAY THAT "I’M RAPPING
ABOUT STUFF BECAUSE THIS IS WHAT
I LIVE IN, THIS IS WHAT I SEE
EVERY DAY" AND THEN COME INTO
COURT AND SAY "EVERYTHING THAT I
SAID IN THAT RAP IS COMPLETELY
UNTRUE."
>> Reporter: WHAT ABOUT THE
ARGUMENT THAT THE CONTENT OF
SOME KINDS OF RAP MUSIC IS SO
VIOLENT THAT IF YOU PUT THAT IN
FRONT OF A JURY, AND IF THE
PROSECUTION SAYS "THIS GUY RAPS
LIKE THIS, AND WE THINK HE’S
GUILTY OF X," THEN THE JURY WILL
BELIEVE ANYTHING?
>> I DON’T THINK THAT MATCHES
THE REALITY OF WHAT HAPPENS IN A
COURTROOM.
WE MUST GET A UNANIMOUS JURY
BEYOND A REASONABLE DOUBT, AND
PLAYING A RAP IS NOT GOING TO
CONVICT SOMEBODY.
IF IT WAS, THEN YOU’D HAVE RAP
BEING PLAYED EVERY DAY AND WE
WOULDN’T EVEN NEED TO WORRY
ABOUT PRODUCING OTHER EVIDENCE.
>> Reporter: BUT IN THE CASE OF
VONTE SKINNER, AT LEAST, AN
APPELLATE COURT IN 2012 RULED
THAT THE EXTENSIVE READING OF
HIS LYRICS DID UNFAIRLY
PREJUDICE THE JURY AND MADE IT
SO SKINNER COULDN’T GET A FAIR
TRIAL.
THAT RULING THREW SKINNER’S CASE
TO THE NEW JERSEY STATE SUPREME
COURT.
>> STATE VS. VONTE SKINNER, MAY
WE PLEASE HAVE APPEARANCES OF
COUNSEL.
>> Reporter: SKINNER’S ORIGINAL
PROSECUTORS, WHO DECLINED TO
SPEAK WITH THE NEWSHOUR,
TESTIFIED BEFORE THE COURT WHY
THEY INTRODUCED SKINNER’S
WRITTEN LYRICS AT TRIAL.
>> THE DEFENDANT’S WRITINGS
REFERENCE HOW HE SAW HIMSELF,
EITHER HYPOTHETICALLY OR
OTHERWISE, REFERENCE A NUMBER OF
THINGS THAT ALL GO TO THE ISSUE
OF WHAT ULTIMATELY HAPPENED IN
THIS CASE.
>> Reporter: PROSECUTOR JENNIFER
PASKIEWICZ ARGUED THAT BECAUSE
SKINNER WROTE LYRICS ABOUT
THINGS LIKE SHOOTING PEOPLE IN
THE HEAD, THAT THIS WAS EVIDENCE
OF A "CONTINUING MINDSET" THAT
HELPED EXPLAINED WHY SKINNER
COULD’VE COMMITTED THE ACTUAL
SHOOTING.
AMONG THOSE TESTIFYING IN FAVOR
OF SKINNER WAS EZRA ROSENBERG,
REPRESENTING THE NEW JERSEY
A.C.L.U.
>> WHEN I FIRST READ MR.
SKINNER’S WRITINGS, THEY WERE...
THEY MAKE ONE HOLD ONE’S BREATH.
THEY ARE EXTRAORDINARILY
VIOLENT, THEY ARE SEXIST, THEY
ARE MISOGYNISTIC.
THEY’RE ALSO VERY CREATIVE.
>> Reporter: ROSENBERG ARGUED
THAT, YES, SKINNER’S LYRICS ARE
OFFENSIVE, BUT THEY’RE ARTISTIC
WORKS.
AND HE SAYS RAP, LIKE FILMMAKING
OR LITERATURE OR ART, SHOULD BE
GIVEN GREATER FIRST AMENDMENT
PROTECTIONS BEFORE BEING ALLOWED
INTO TRIALS.
IF NOT, HE WORRIES ABOUT A
CHILLING EFFECT ON FREE
EXPRESSION.
>> EVERY WRITING IS SUBJECT TO
FIRST AMENDMENT PROTECTIONS.
BECAUSE THERE ARE SOCIAL AND
POLITICAL CONCERNS THAT RAP
LYRICS-- GANGSTER RAP IN
PARTICULAR-- ADDRESS, THEY ARE
ENTITLED TO THE HIGHEST
PROTECTIONS.
THAT’S REALLY KEY.
>> Reporter: MORE SO THAN OTHER
ART FORMS OR FORMS OF
EXPRESSION?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> Reporter: ON MONDAY, IN A
RULING THAT COULD HAVE NATIONAL
IMPLICATIONS, THE NEW JERSEY
STATE SUPREME COURT UNANIMOUSLY
AGREED THAT VONTE SKINNER’S RAP
LYRICS SHOULD NOT HAVE BEEN
ADMITTED AT TRIAL, RULING THAT
THOSE GRAPHIC LYRICS "BORE
LITTLE OR NO PROBATIVE VALUE" AS
EVIDENCE, AND THEY RISKED"
POISONING THE JURY."
IN THEIR RULING, THE JUSTICES
ALSO CRITICIZED PROSECUTORS FOR
LINKING SKINNER’S LYRICS WITH
SKINNER’S ACTIONS.
WITH HIS CONVICTION OVERTURNED,
SKINNER WILL NOW GET A NEW
TRIAL.
IN THE MEANTIME, HE REMAINS IN
JAIL, WHERE HE’S BEEN FOR
SEVERAL YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: TO LEARN MORE
ABOUT THE RECENT RULING IN VONTE
SKINNER’S CASE, VISIT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME LATE NEWS
TONIGHT: AT LEAST 16 ISLAMIC
EXTREMIST HAVE BEEN KILLED IN
NORTHERN IRAQ AFTER A SECOND DAY
OF AMERICAN AIR STRIKES.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID ARMS AND
EQUIPMENT WILL ALSO BE
DESTROYED.
THE ATTACKS ARE MEANT TO
SLOW THE ISLAMIC STATE’S ADVANCE
THERE.
BRITAIN AND FRANCE ARE SENDING
HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE TO AN
ESTIMATED 40,000 PEOPLE TRAPPED
ON A MOUNTAIN IN NORTHERN IRAQ
AFTER FLEEING THOSE ISLAMIC
FIGHTERS. AND IN WEST AFRICA,
GUINEA ANNOUNCED IT IS CLOSING
ITS BORDERS WITH LIBERIA AND
SIERRA LEONE IN AN EFFORT TO
STEM THE SPREAD OF THE EBOLA
VIRUS. NEARLY 1,000 PEOPLE HAVE
DIED OF THE DISEASE IN THOSE
THREE COUNTRIES.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW. I AM HARI SREENIVASAN.
GOOD NIGHT.